In this video we will learn about functions. So I will explain what our functions.
Then I'll explain what is parameter passing and what are the different methods of passing parameters
like, pass by value, pass by address,
And pass by reference. In C language,
We have only pass by value and pass by address; but in C++, we also have pass by reference. So I will
take some simple example and explain all these parameter passing.
So let us start with functions. What are functions? Function is a piece of code which performs a specific
task. We have already studied about structures. In structures,
I said that structure is a group of related data members. Now function is a group of related instructions
which perform a specific task. So, grouping data is a structure, grouping instructions is a function.
Functions are called as modules or procedures. See, instead of writing a single main program,
Writing everything inside the main function, we can break the main function into small manageable size
pieces and we can separate the repeating tasks or smaller tasks.
For example, if I am writing one program, so everything is going to be inside main function. So, let us
say these are the instructions in main function.
I may be writing thousands of lines of code inside the main function.
So this is not a good style of programming. Writing all the lines inside a single main function,
It will be very huge to manage and it's very difficult to develop.
So if we find that this program can be broken down into smaller tasks we can break them into smaller
functions like suppose, first function,
fun1 ( ), it may perform some task and another function,
fun2 ( ) and this is performing some task, and similarly fun3 ( )
I can have, and performing some task. So, I can break this larger task into smaller simple tasks and then
I can use them all together inside the main function.
Suppose here I have main function, then inside the main function I can call these functions. So, fun1 ( )
fun2 ( ), fun3 ( ).
For example, I have taken these three functions.
For example I am explaining like this. So here you can see that, if I combine all together, everything is there
inside the main function.
Main function is utilizing these functions,
So that will sum up to a similar program.
If we follow this style of programming, this style of programming is called as Monolithic programming
right, everything inside a single body.
So, This is monolithic programming. Now, breaking a program into smaller
pieces of functions and using those functions inside the main function that is integrating them all
together.
This is another style of programming.
This is called as modular programming or procedural programming.
.
So this style of programming is called as modular or procedural programming.
So this is easy for developing.
You can break the program into smaller tasks and you can focus on smaller tasks and finish them and
make them perfect. It's easy for one single individual to develop the application.
Even you can break this software project into a team of programmers.
Now, if you follow this style, then only one person has to develop this one.
If you follow this style of programming, a group of programmers can develop a single application like
some people are developing,
Some functions like one person developing this one,
second person, third person, and one of the person who's a team leader can integrate all of them inside
the main function.
So this style of programming has increased productivity and also re-usability.
Like, if suppose I need fu1 ( ) one more time, so I can call it again.
So instead of writing the same code again, like suppose, these 3 lines are performing some task and
these 3 lines are performing the same task, so instead of writing it 2 times, I can write the function
one time and I can use it two times.
So this is re-usability. And the same function can be used in other software projects also.
So you can put the group of functions together in a library also.
So these are the benefits of functions just to name a few.
So, C language as a procedural or modular programming language.
So this is the topmost feature supported by C programming which is also there in C++. C++ is beyond
this one. C++ follows object orientation, right; Where you group the related functions together and put
them in a single class.
So we will learn about it in the coming videos.
So right now let us focus on modular programming. So, we can break a program into functions.
Now let us write a simple example function and learn how we can separate the task from the main function
and what are parameters. I have a small function, example function.
I'll explain something about this.
See here is a main function, from here to here is the main function.
Now in this I'm performing a very simple task that is I want to add two numbers so I have three variables
x y z; and x and y are having some values. Then, I want to add these two values.
So even in main function I can add it, just I have to say x + y, right?
But, I prefer instead of adding inside the main function, let it be done by some other function.
For adding two numbers,
I'm writing a function, right.
So, as I said that, instead of writing it inside the main function, you can separate the logic and
write functions for performing smaller tasks. So, we're looking at addition function.
So this is a function which will add to numbers and returns the addition or the sum of two numbers.
So let us see how this function is.
See, this function is taking 2 values, a and b and locally it is having its own variable c, then adding
these two values and storing the result in c and it will return
the result, right.
So, it will take two values,
This function needs 2 parameters, it will add them and returns that as c.
So, if we see in the main function, back to the main function, here I'm calling add function, this is the function
called and I'm passing two parameters,
x and y, these values will go into a and b. It will add them and return the result, that result
will come into z and then it will print this value z.
So as per this example, it will print the value 15, right. Now, let us learn some terminology.
See this is the prototype of a function or header of a function,
This is called as prototype or it is called the signature of a function,
Right.?
And this is a declaration of a function.
Then this body is there, this is called as definition of a function or elaboration of a function.
So this is declaration and definition of a function.
And this is function call, We are calling the function. Now, what are the parameters?
So here, we are passing these two values x and y to this function,
which is taking 2 parameters. So these parameters, the one which we are passing, these are called
as actual parameters.
These are called as actual parameters, and these parameters which are taken by this function,
These are called formal parameters.
So these are formal parameters.
Now, let us understand that working once again, this is the main function, program starts from here.
Starting point of the program, three variables are declared, values are assigned, function is called. So, the
control goes here and when the control is transferred, the values of actual parameters are copied in formal
parameters. So, x value that is 10 is copied in a, and 5
that is y value is copied in b. Then, in c the addition of the values is stored, so 15, and 15 is returned.
And when the function returns it will come back to the line from where it was called.
So the result of the function, is 15.
So this becomes 15, and that 15 is assigned to z. So, z becomes 15,
and the value is printed.
So this is working.
So I have explained you the parameters and also explained you the working.
Now, let us see how it works inside the main memory.
This is the code section area. Inside the code section,
This is a function add,
And this is a machine code
machine code of that function.
And this is the mean function.
This is the machine code of the main function, right.
So let us see in detail, how the program works and how the functions are utilized.
Now the program starts from here, first of all 3 variables are declared.
So inside the stack, that is inside the activation record of main function, 3 variables are created
that are x and y and z. The 3 variables are created, then first variable will be assign with value 10 and
second with 5.
So this is 10 and this is 5.
Then function add is called. Once the function add is called its own activation record or a stack frame
is created.
And it will have its own variables that are a, b and c. These 2 parameters and local variable.
Now the value x that 10, that is passed here and the value of y that is 5 is passed here, then it will add
these two numbers.
So the result is 15. Now, the next line is returning.
So when it is returning, the value of c is copied in z.
Because here, in this line, you can see this copied in z.
Then, once the function ends,
It will come out and returns back to this line.
So this activation record is deleted.
See, It is just like this, from here
If you see, suppose, from here the main function has called add function.
So the control goes to the function and when it is executed and when it finishes, this activation record is
deleted and the control comes back to the main function here.
Then it will print this one.
So if suppose both lines are for printing, So it will put in this value 15.
So this is how it happens inside the main memory when you are writing the function.
So the benefit of function is that, the function will have its own activation record, its separate set of
variables will be there inside the memory, and when it is called they are created,
and when their function terminates they are destroyed.
And, one more point about this one is, this function cannot access the variables of main and main cannot
access the variables of this add function, right. One function cannot access the variables of another function.
It means that I cannot use x y z here inside add function because they belong to main function and
I cannot use a, b, c inside main function because they belong to the function. So, that's it.
This is about the function.
Let us look at the things once again quickly.
See I have shown you how to define a function.
This is the prototype of a function, and is the body of a function.
These are the parameters, they are called as formal parameters.
And this is the function call.
These are actual parameters, right?
That is, the one who is calling, its parameters are actual parameters, and how the function calls are
made,
This is there inside the memory.
So that's all. Now, in the next video, I will explain
parameter passing methods. So, the 3 methods, we will see them together by taking some simple example.